# TGLO-TAMUCC-NRT-STAGES-2024
Project: Application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) to identify and understand the spatial and temporal patterns and key drivers of Enterococcus levels in Texas coastal waters to effectively reduce beach advisories and enhance water quality.

Primary Community Partners: Texas General Land Office (TGLO)

Group Members: Laura Button, Ifeanyi Anyanwu, Quincy Walker

With the support of the Texas General Land Office (TGLO), this project will address the critical environmental and public health issue of bacteria pollution in the coastal waters of Texas. The 367 miles of Texas Gulf beach shoreline and 3,359 miles of total shoreline are encountering significant challenges in maintaining water quality, particularly as coastal development and climate change continue to alter the landscape and water systems. The Texas Beach Watch program, which monitors water quality at 61 recreational beaches across 172 sites, has established a threshold of 104 coliform units per 100 ml to trigger beach advisories, a measure indicating unsafe water conditions. Recent studies have revealed a concerning link between rising sea levels, growing populations, and increasing bacteria levels in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico. This project seeks to employ AI and ML to delve deeper into the spatial and temporal patterns of bacteria distribution and its correlation with land use, hydroclimatic variables, and population dynamics. Through the integration of diverse data sources including, ground based radar measurements for rainfall data, local septic system and bacteria monitoring data, GPS cell phone data, coastal ground elevation, seawater level, we aim to pinpoint the key drivers of Enterococcus levels in Texas coastal waters, to effectively reduce beach advisories and enhance water quality. The overarching goal is to mitigate the frequency of beach advisories by understanding and managing the sources and behaviors of bacteria under varying environmental conditions. By identifying the factors that contribute to elevated bacteria levels during dry weather patterns and tracing the migration of contaminants, this project will provide actionable insights that could lead to more effective environmental management and policy decisions focused on preserving the health of Texas’ coastal waters and its inhabitants.
